
Guide to version 0.4-0 of proto

1. Lazy Evaluation

The proto function now evaluates its ... argument lazily.
This together with a lazy cloning routine, clone, allows the
user to use a proto object as a template for other objects.
For example, in the code below gwindow is the gWidgets
function to create a new window and gbutton is the function
to create a button in the indicated container.

We create a proto object p which defines a container
embodying a new window and a go method which places a button
in it.  Because of lazy evaluation gwindow() is not run
until container is accessed and that does not occur until go
is run.   RAther than run the code associated with container
when p is defined a promise to later define it is stored in
container.  The promise is "forced", i.e. evaluated, the
first time it is accessed.

The line defining q creates a second proto object which is
the same as the first.  The copying is lazy in that it does
not force any promises but just creates duplicate promises
in q.

When we finally run p$go() this forces the promise in
p$container causing a window to be created and then a button
is created in it.

Similarly we run q$go since container is not a copy of the
one in p but is a copy of the promise when it is run it
creates a second container (rather than copying the
container created by p$go).

	library(proto)
	library(gWidgets)

	p <- proto(go = function(.) gbutton(.$msg, cont = .$container),
	       msg = "Hello", container = gwindow())  # now its lazy
	q <- p$clone()  # promises copied, not forced
	p$go()
	q$go()

Had the statements been run in the following order, i.e. q
is defined after p$go is run, then clone would have copied
the actual container and not a promise to it so q would try
to place its button in the same container as p giving an
error.

	p <- proto(go = function(.) gbutton(.$msg, cont = .$container),
	       msg = "Hello", container = gwindow())  # now its lazy
	p$go()
	q <- p$clone()  # promises copied, not forced
	q$go()

Here is an example that does not make use of any additional
R packages.  It also appears in example(proto) .  Note the
difference between the following two code snippets which
differ only in the order of the statements:

# q is cloned before promises in p are forced
p <- proto(append = function(., x) .$L[[x]] <- x, L = proto())
q <- p$clone()
p$append("A")
as.list(p$L)
q$append("B")
as.list(q$L)

# promises in p are forced before q is cloned
p <- proto(append = function(., x) .$L[[x]] <- x, L = proto())
p$append("C")
as.list(p$L)
q <- p$clone()
q$append("D")
as.list(q$L)

2. $.proto

If p is a proto object and meth is a method in it then
p$meth(myArg) first runs p$meth creating an instantiated
proto object.  Previously this was a call to meth with p
inserted as its first argument.  This has been changed so
that the keyword receiver is inserted as its first argument
and reciever is given a default value of p so that by
default it works the same as before; however, it is possible
to specify a different value for receiver like this:

	p$meth(receiver = q, myArg)

in which case the meth found in p (or an ancestor) is run
using q as the receiver object and myArg as an argument.
Note that

	p$meth(myArg)
	p$meth(receiver = p, myArg)

are the same.

3. super() and that()

Previously .that and .super were built in variables that
could be used in methods to refer to the object the method
is defined in and its parent respectively.  These variables
were stored in every proto object and if a method had that
object as its environment then it could access them to find
out what object it belongs to and to easily refer to its
object's parent.

Unfortunately this polluted ever proto object with .that and
.super variables.  To clean this up we have defined that()
and super() functions which simply return the environment of
the method they are defined in and its parent respectively
so that .that and .super are no longer needed.

Also there were special rules in $.proto so .that$meth would
not automatically insert .that into the resulting function
and similarly for .super.   For compatibility .that and
.super continue to exist and the special rule continues to
be supported; however, for that() and super() no special
processing is done.  Given the existence of receiver its not
needed.  Thus:

	.that$meth(p, myArgs)
	that()$meth(receiver = p, myArgs)

are the same.  Both .that/.super and that()/super()
currently exist but in an upcoming version of proto
.that/.super will be eliminated so users should take the
time to switch over.

Note that .that and .super would continue to work within a
function within a method but that() and super() do not.  On
the other hand its quite easy to work around it:

	p <- function(.) {
		f <- function() .that
		x <- f()
	}

is the same as

	p <- function(.) {
		that <- that()
		f <- function() that
		x <- f()
	}

Looking over a large amount of proto code we had found that
very little of it uses .that or .super so the elimination of
these variables in every proto object seems like a
worthwhile benefit compared to the minor change in syntax
required in a small number of routines.

4. There are several new demos.  To see them try this:

	demo(package = proto)

One of these demos is from John Verzani who developed the
gWidgets package.  For more proto examples with gWidgets see
the links on the proto home page to his other examples.

5. instantiatedProtoMethod

This feature has been in proto for a while.  It was
developed based on the original by Tom Short.  p$meth
creates an object of class "instantiatedProtoMethod" which
has its own print method.

